README.md, before:


[![npm version](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/lichenscript.svg)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/lichenscript)


# LichenScript

A lightweight language compiled to JavaScript/C.
Easy to integrated with the Web Ecosystem.

## Why

LichenScript is designed to write untrustworthy plugins for an exist system.
For example, LichenScript can be used to write third-party plugins for your website/mobile app, which is isolated.
It has modern syntaxes such as pattern matching/discriminated union.
It's designed to be lightweight, easy to compile to target platform with very small overhead.

# Features

- Modern syntaxes, close to TypeScript/JavaScript
- Static typing
- Pattern matching

**Target C:**

- AOT compilation
- Fast cold start
- Lightweight runtime
- Portable(WebAssembly/Mobile)
- Reference counting
- Use the library of C/C++/Rust through C-ABI

**Target JavaScript(WIP):**

- Readable
- Small overhead
- Isolate environment

# Senerios

- Plugin system for a Website
- Game development
- Mini-program environment

# Install

```
npm install -g lichenscript
```

# Quick Start

Make a new directory, and create a file named `main.lc` in it.

Coding in this file:

```
function main() {
    print("Hello World");
    print("你好世界");
}
```

Execute the command to run:

```shell
lsc run ./main.lc
```

## Build the WebAssembly version:

Make sure you have installed [Emscripten](https://emscripten.org/)
and [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/).
And make sure `emcc` is available in your shell.

Execute the command:

```shell
lsc run --platform wasm32 ./main.lc
```

# Syntaxes

The documentation is still work in progress.

Check [Examples](./examples/).

# Roadmap

✅ Done
🔨 Work in progress
📖 Planning

| Syntax | Status |
| ------ | ------ |
| i32/f32 | ✅ |
| String | ✅ |
| Array/Map | ✅ |
| Class/Enum | ✅ |
| Discriminated union | ✅ |
| Lambda Expression | ✅ |
| Pattern matching | ✅ |
| Object inheritance | ✅ |
| i64/f64 | 🔨 |
| Tuple | 🔨 |
| For Iterator | 🔨 |
| Customize getter/setter | 🔨 |
| Operator overloading | 📖 |
| Async/await | 📖 |

| Stdlib | Status |
| ------ | ------ |
| Array | ✅ |
| Map | ✅ |
| Regex | 📖 |

| Target | Status |
| ------ | ------ |
| Compiled to C (macOS/Linux) | ✅ |
| Compiled to C (Emscripten/WASM) | ✅ |
| Compiled to JavaScript | 🔨 |

# FAQ

## What's the different with Rust? Why not Rust?

LichenScript does NOT use lifetime.

LichenScript is a high level language.
I don't want the programmers to care about the detail
of the memory such as liftime/smart pointer.

LichenScript is designed to use the ecosystem of C++ in
Computer Graphic. So compiling to C is reasonable.

It can be easily integrated with Rust with C-ABI.

LichenScript supports inheritance.

## What's different from JavaScript/TypeScript?

- More lightweight to run, don't depends on a heavy runtime.
- The C runtime is very small, LichenScript's object uses reference counting to free memory.
- More static features.

### No exceptions and try/catch

Exception mechanism depends on a heavy runtime.
So it's exclude from the language.

Commit message:

feat: add prerequisite part to README

README.md, after:


[![npm version](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/lichenscript.svg)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/lichenscript)


# LichenScript

A lightweight language compiled to JavaScript/C.
Easy to integrated with the Web Ecosystem.

## Why

LichenScript is designed to write untrustworthy plugins for an exist system.
For example, LichenScript can be used to write third-party plugins for your website/mobile app, which is isolated.
It has modern syntaxes such as pattern matching/discriminated union.
It's designed to be lightweight, easy to compile to target platform with very small overhead.

# Features

- Modern syntaxes, close to TypeScript/JavaScript
- Static typing
- Pattern matching

**Target C:**

- AOT compilation
- Fast cold start
- Lightweight runtime
- Portable(WebAssembly/Mobile)
- Reference counting
- Use the library of C/C++/Rust through C-ABI

**Target JavaScript(WIP):**

- Readable
- Small overhead
- Isolate environment

# Senerios

- Plugin system for a Website
- Game development
- Mini-program environment

# Prerequisite

macOS:

- Install [XCode](https://developer.apple.com/xcode/)

Linux:

- Install [gcc](https://gcc.gnu.org/) or [clang](https://clang.llvm.org/)

# Install

```
npm install -g lichenscript
```

# Quick Start

Make a new directory, and create a file named `main.lc` in it.

Coding in this file:

```
function main() {
    print("Hello World");
    print("你好世界");
}
```

Execute the command to run:

```shell
lsc run ./main.lc
```

## Build the WebAssembly version:

Make sure you have installed [Emscripten](https://emscripten.org/)
and [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/).
And make sure `emcc` is available in your shell.

Execute the command:

```shell
lsc run --platform wasm32 ./main.lc
```

# Syntaxes

The documentation is still work in progress.

Check [Examples](./examples/).

# VSCode Extension

Intall [lichenscript-vscode](https://github.com/vincentdchan/lichenscript-vscode) from the extension store.

# Roadmap

✅ Done
🔨 Work in progress
📖 Planning

| Syntax | Status |
| ------ | ------ |
| i32/f32 | ✅ |
| String | ✅ |
| Array/Map | ✅ |
| Class/Enum | ✅ |
| Discriminated union | ✅ |
| Lambda Expression | ✅ |
| Pattern matching | ✅ |
| Object inheritance | ✅ |
| i64/f64 | 🔨 |
| Tuple | 🔨 |
| For Iterator | 🔨 |
| Customize getter/setter | 🔨 |
| Operator overloading | 📖 |
| Async/await | 📖 |

| Stdlib | Status |
| ------ | ------ |
| Array | ✅ |
| Map | ✅ |
| Regex | 📖 |

| Target | Status |
| ------ | ------ |
| Compiled to C (macOS/Linux) | ✅ |
| Compiled to C (Emscripten/WASM) | ✅ |
| Compiled to JavaScript | 🔨 |

# FAQ

## What's the different with Rust? Why not Rust?

LichenScript does NOT use lifetime.

LichenScript is a high level language.
I don't want the programmers to care about the detail
of the memory such as liftime/smart pointer.

LichenScript is designed to use the ecosystem of C++ in
Computer Graphic. So compiling to C is reasonable.

It can be easily integrated with Rust with C-ABI.

LichenScript supports inheritance.

## What's different from JavaScript/TypeScript?

- More lightweight to run, don't depends on a heavy runtime.
- The C runtime is very small, LichenScript's object uses reference counting to free memory.
- More static features.

### No exceptions and try/catch

Exception mechanism depends on a heavy runtime.
So it's exclude from the language.
